README.md, before:

# Dnsmasq to Unbound DNS Registration

This OPNsense plugin automatically registers dnsmasq DHCP leases and static host entries in Unbound DNS, enabling local hostname resolution for DHCP clients.

> **Note:** This plugin is intended as a stopgap solution until native integration between Unbound and a supported DHCP service is implemented in OPNsense core.

## Features

- Watches dnsmasq lease file and static hosts for changes
- Registers A and PTR records in Unbound DNS
- Supports multiple domains via dnsmasq's IP-range-to-domain mapping
- Deduplicates records (static entries take precedence over leases)
- Automatic cleanup of stale records
- System status notifications in OPNsense web UI
- Periodic reconciliation to handle Unbound restarts

## Requirements

- OPNsense with Unbound DNS resolver enabled (remote control is enabled by default)
- dnsmasq plugin installed and configured with DHCP

## Installation

Install via the OPNsense plugin system or manually:

```
pkg install os-dnsmasq-to-unbound
```

## Configuration

Navigate to **Services > Dnsmasq to Unbound** in the OPNsense web UI.

### Settings

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| Enable | Enable/disable the DNS registration service |
| Watch Leases | Register DNS entries for DHCP leases |
| Watch Static | Register DNS entries for static host mappings |
| Domain Filter | Limit registration to specific domains (comma-separated) |

### Domain Configuration

The plugin reads domain configuration from dnsmasq's configuration:

- **Global domain**: `domain=lan` in dnsmasq.conf
- **Range-specific domains**: `domain=guest,192.168.20.1,192.168.20.254`

If no domain is configured in dnsmasq, DHCP leases cannot be registered (static hosts with explicit domains will still work).

## How It Works

1. The daemon watches `/var/db/dnsmasq.leases` and `/var/etc/dnsmasq-hosts` for changes
2. When changes are detected, it parses the files and compares with current Unbound state
3. New records are added, changed records are updated, and stale records are removed
4. Records are marked with a TXT record (`managed-by=dnsmasq-to-unbound`) for identification
5. Every 5 minutes, a full reconciliation runs to catch any missed changes

## Troubleshooting

### Service Status

Check service status via CLI:
```
configctl dnsmasqtounbound status
```

View registered records:
```
configctl dnsmasqtounbound listrecords
```

### System Logs

Check system logs for errors:
```
grep dnsmasq_watcher /var/log/system/latest.log
```

### Common Issues

**"Unbound remote control not enabled"**
- This should not normally occur as OPNsense enables remote control by default
- Check that Unbound is running and restart if necessary

**"No domain configured in dnsmasq.conf"**
- Add `domain=lan` (or your domain) to dnsmasq configuration

**Records not appearing**
- Verify the service is running
- Check that Unbound is running and controllable
- Ensure domains match the domain filter (if configured)

### Status Notifications

The plugin reports status via OPNsense's system status indicator:

| Status | Meaning |
|--------|---------|
| OK (green) | Service running normally |
| Warning (yellow) | Some records skipped (check logs) |
| Error (red) | Service failed (check logs for details) |

## License

BSD 2-Clause License. See source files for full license text.

Commit message:

dns/dnsmasq-to-unbound: add background section on DHCP/DNS limitations
Document the shortcomings of each OPNsense DHCP option for Unbound
DNS integration:
- ISC DHCP: deprecated, watcher daemon crashes on bad hostnames
- Kea DHCP: no dynamic lease registration, static requires restart
- dnsmasq: built-in DNS only, forwarding has domain issues

References: opnsense/core#7475, #8075, #8612, #9277

README.md, after:

# Dnsmasq to Unbound DNS Registration

This OPNsense plugin automatically registers dnsmasq DHCP leases and static host entries in Unbound DNS, enabling local hostname resolution for DHCP clients.

> **Note:** This plugin is intended as a stopgap solution until native integration between Unbound and a supported DHCP service is implemented in OPNsense core.

## Background

OPNsense offers three DHCP server options, each with limitations for Unbound DNS integration:

| DHCP Server | Dynamic Lease DNS | Static Reservation DNS | Status |
|-------------|-------------------|------------------------|--------|
| ISC DHCP | Buggy | Yes | End-of-life, deprecated |
| Kea DHCP | **No** | Yes (requires Unbound restart) | Active, DNS integration deprioritized |
| dnsmasq | Built-in DNS only | Built-in DNS only | Active |

### ISC DHCP (Deprecated)

ISC DHCP had Unbound integration via `unbound_watcher.py`, but it suffers from reliability issues where the [watcher daemon silently crashes](https://github.com/opnsense/core/issues/8075) when encountering malformed hostnames, stopping all subsequent DNS registration until Unbound is restarted. ISC DHCP reached end-of-life in 2022 and is being phased out of OPNsense.

### Kea DHCP

Kea is ISC's strategic replacement but currently only supports static reservation DNS registration in Unbound - dynamic leases are [not registered](https://github.com/opnsense/core/issues/7475). Static reservations also require an Unbound restart to take effect. This limitation is acknowledged but deprioritized by the OPNsense team due to architectural complexity concerns.

### dnsmasq

dnsmasq includes its own DNS server with automatic lease registration, but many users prefer Unbound for its DNSSEC validation, DNS-over-TLS support, and advanced caching. When using Unbound as the primary resolver:

- dnsmasq's internal DNS registrations are not accessible to Unbound
- Query forwarding from Unbound to dnsmasq is possible but [has issues](https://github.com/opnsense/core/issues/8612) where static reservations don't inherit the system domain
- Domain overrides [may not apply consistently](https://github.com/opnsense/core/issues/9277) to static mappings vs dynamic leases

### This Plugin

This plugin bridges the gap by directly registering dnsmasq DHCP data into Unbound via `unbound-control`, providing the simplicity of dnsmasq DHCP with the features of Unbound DNS. It avoids the reliability issues of the ISC DHCP watcher by using a more robust file-watching mechanism and graceful error handling.

## Features

- Watches dnsmasq lease file and static hosts for changes
- Registers A and PTR records in Unbound DNS
- Supports multiple domains via dnsmasq's IP-range-to-domain mapping
- Deduplicates records (static entries take precedence over leases)
- Automatic cleanup of stale records
- System status notifications in OPNsense web UI
- Periodic reconciliation to handle Unbound restarts

## Requirements

- OPNsense with Unbound DNS resolver enabled (remote control is enabled by default)
- dnsmasq plugin installed and configured with DHCP

## Installation

Install via the OPNsense plugin system or manually:

```
pkg install os-dnsmasq-to-unbound
```

## Configuration

Navigate to **Services > Dnsmasq to Unbound** in the OPNsense web UI.

### Settings

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| Enable | Enable/disable the DNS registration service |
| Watch Leases | Register DNS entries for DHCP leases |
| Watch Static | Register DNS entries for static host mappings |
| Domain Filter | Limit registration to specific domains (comma-separated) |

### Domain Configuration

The plugin reads domain configuration from dnsmasq's configuration:

- **Global domain**: `domain=lan` in dnsmasq.conf
- **Range-specific domains**: `domain=guest,192.168.20.1,192.168.20.254`

If no domain is configured in dnsmasq, DHCP leases cannot be registered (static hosts with explicit domains will still work).

## How It Works

1. The daemon watches `/var/db/dnsmasq.leases` and `/var/etc/dnsmasq-hosts` for changes
2. When changes are detected, it parses the files and compares with current Unbound state
3. New records are added, changed records are updated, and stale records are removed
4. Records are marked with a TXT record (`managed-by=dnsmasq-to-unbound`) for identification
5. Every 5 minutes, a full reconciliation runs to catch any missed changes

## Troubleshooting

### Service Status

Check service status via CLI:
```
configctl dnsmasqtounbound status
```

View registered records:
```
configctl dnsmasqtounbound listrecords
```

### System Logs

Check system logs for errors:
```
grep dnsmasq_watcher /var/log/system/latest.log
```

### Common Issues

**"Unbound remote control not enabled"**
- This should not normally occur as OPNsense enables remote control by default
- Check that Unbound is running and restart if necessary

**"No domain configured in dnsmasq.conf"**
- Add `domain=lan` (or your domain) to dnsmasq configuration

**Records not appearing**
- Verify the service is running
- Check that Unbound is running and controllable
- Ensure domains match the domain filter (if configured)

### Status Notifications

The plugin reports status via OPNsense's system status indicator:

| Status | Meaning |
|--------|---------|
| OK (green) | Service running normally |
| Warning (yellow) | Some records skipped (check logs) |
| Error (red) | Service failed (check logs for details) |

## License

BSD 2-Clause License. See source files for full license text.
